First off -- the maxus program derives the "Sx" variable as described in the articles and topobreak derives the "Sb" variable.  (The editors didn't like "maxus" and "topobreak".)  I'll describe their usages and what the windower function does below. 


Maxus/Sx:

maxus outputs the maximum upwind slope for a specific direction. Contrary to earlier versions, this version does not set the minimum upwind slope value to zero. You can have negative upwind slopes (i.e. greater exposure; a small rise on a flat plane will have a greater maxus (less negative) than an exposed ridgetop). An example of its usage:

> maxus -a 220 -z 1000 -d test_dem.asc

produces the maximum upwind slopes calculated for azimuth 220, that is looking 220 degrees clockwise from North.  The dem file is an ascii formatted file created using the gridascii command in ARC/GRID and must contain integer values.  The -z option controls dmax or the maximum distance the algorithm will search for shelter producing pixels.  1000m should be sufficient for deriving Sb later; if you were looking for degrees of exposure/shelter and not just drift zones, I would suggest lower values for -z, perhaps 100 - 300 m.  The output will be an ascii file named maxus_220.asc.  I usually calculate maxus one direction at a time in order to calculate topobreaks later.  In all my applications I have simply computed maxus in 5 degree increments.  You will also notice that I usually average several maxus calculations within an upwind window to obtain an exposure index more robust to deviations from the primary wind direction, whether over time or due to topographic deflections.  If all you're after are the Sb values don't bother with the aforementioned averaging yet.

Topobreak/Sb

> topobreak -s 60 -a 220 -d test_dem.asc

This algorithm calculates a local Sx for a given azimuth/direction (220 deg in the example) with a separation distance (-s) of 60m in the example, retrieves the outlying Sx grid (maxus_220.asc in the above example -- MUST BE IN THE SAME DIRECTORY AS THE ONE YOU ARE EXECUTING TOPOBREAK IN), calculates the difference between the two and returns the grid "tbreak60_220.asc".  When you get to this point, I would then average tbreak grids across an upwind window as described above and in the articles.  You can either do this back in ARC/GRID or use the windower function described below.  I have then thresholded the upwind window averaged Sb values to determine if there was or wasn't a sufficient slope break to force flow separation and the formation of the drift.  There hasn't been any direct fieldwork to ascertain exactly what that number should be.  Although I used 7 degrees in the GLV study, I have found that 5 degrees works best in the rolling, semi-arid landscape we have here in Reynolds Creek, ID.  I have much more data to go on here than I had in GLV.  Also on the choice of separation distance (the -s option above) - this generally controls how wide a drift is modeled.  The 300 m I used in the GLV application is probably too large as I believe sloughing/avalanching pushed some of the higher snow accumulations further downhill; in the most recent application I used 60m but drifts were allowed to move downslope as the winter wore on; my hunch is that something around 100-150m might work best for a static regression-type application.  I have also used two stipulations in helping to define drift zones: 

        a)  though not mentioned in either article ... a cell cannot have a negative maxus (Sx) value and be a "drift"
        b)  In each application I used different methods of measuring whether each slope break had sufficient upwind            exposure needed to entrain the high amounts of snow needed to form a downwind drift.  In the GLV                application (JHM2002)  I used a thresholding method described on p. 529 (last paragraph of Section 3a) and p 532           (paragraph 5).  In the RCEW application (HP2002), I used a slightly different method to separate moderate drifts                 from large drifts as described on p. 3593.

Windower

The windower program, will output averaged maxus or tbreak across a series of upwind windows after the uni-directional  files have been created. For instance, to calculate maxus averaged across a 30 degree upwind window for prevailing wind directions 180 through 270 where you have created maxus files for directions 165 through 285 with 5 degrees of separation between each file, use the following command:

% windower -i 5 -w 30 -a 180,270 -p maxus

The output files will have the naming convention maxus_30.180.asc through maxus_30.270.asc.  It's just a lot easier than typing in a bunch of "mean" statements in ARC.

There are usage guidelines for each command if you just type in the command name, however these programs are far from idiot-proof. It's quite possible that a user could step into a hole and disappear for a while. The maxus routines can take a little time if your dem is large. It took about 45 seconds on my machine to produce a maxus image from a 297x324 10m cell grid.  The maxus routine does report back to the screen after completing each 50 grid rows; if you don't see a response after awhile, there may be a problem brewing.

On your PC you will be running these programs from the MS-DOS or command prompt.  Navigate to the local directory that your executables and DEM are in and fire away.  If you have absolutely no experience with either MS-DOS or UNIX, you use the "cd" command to manuever around.  Type "help cd" at the prompt for a man file on its usage.

Have fun! Any questions, don't be afraid to ask.  If anything seems strange or if I can provide any help in understanding what the heck I have done please get in touch with me.  You wouldn't be the first on the block that needed further explanation ... some very sharp people have had a difficult time with some of this stuff ... even I have to re-explain things to myself at times!  I would much rather spend the time with you to help you get these algorithms tuned to your applications then to have you in a befuddled state mumbling that these damn algorithms are %$%!@.  If you have any material on some of the research you have conducted already, I would love to read it.

Thanks and good luck,
